DOCSUP-7090: document extractTextFromHTML (#22610)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/sql-reference/functions/string-functions.md

-   [List of XML and HTML character entity references](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references)

## extractTextFromHTML {#extracttextfromhtml}

> The function extracts text from HTML or XHTML according to the following rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function extracts text from HTML or XHTML according to the following rules:
```

1. Comments starting with `<!--` and ending with `-->` are removed.
1. The content of a `CDATA` section between `<![CDATA[` and `]]>` is left as is, without furthure processing. Note that it is appended to the previous text without any space.
1. A text wrapped with `<script>` or `<style>` tags is removed entirely. If `script` or `style` are the names of XML namespaces (like `<script:a>`) then they are treated like usual tags.
1. Any tag is replaced with a space. Note that elements like `<>`, `<!>`, `<!-->` are also replaced. Tag without closing bracket `>` is removed to the end of an input text. 

> 1. Any sequence of whitespaces (space, new line, carriage return, tab, vertical tab or form feed) is converted to a single space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Any sequence of whitespaces (space, new line, carriage return, tab, vertical tab or form feed) is converted to a single space. But if text is separated by other elements and there is no whitespace, it is inserted.
```

Reviewer 2: The text must be verbatim copy-paste of the comment in the source code.
No edits acceptable.

Author: Description very close to the comment in the source code is ready.
@alexey-milovidov, have a look, please.

1. Leading and trailing spaces are removed from the returned text.

!!! info "Note"
    HTML and XML entities are not decoded by the extractTextFromHTML function.
    
    It is not guaranteed that extractTextFromHTML function fully supports all HTML, XML or XHTML standards. But it tries to do the best.

**Syntax**

``` sql
extractTextFromHTML(x)
```

**Arguments**

-   `x` — input text. [String](../../sql-reference/data-types/string.md). 

**Returned value**

-   Extracted text.

Type: [String](../../sql-reference/data-types/string.md).

**Example**

The first example contains several tags and a comment and also shows whitespace processing.

> The second example shows CDATA and script tag processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second example shows `CDATA` and script tag processing.
```

-   [List of XML and HTML character entity references](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_XML_and_HTML_character_entity_references)

## extractTextFromHTML {#extracttextfromhtml}

A function to extract text from HTML or XHTML.

> It does not necessarily 100% conforms to any of the HTML, XML or XHTML standards, but the implementation is reasonably accurate and it is fast. The rules are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It does not necessarily 100% conform to any of the HTML, XML or XHTML standards, but the implementation is reasonably accurate and it is fast. The rules are the following:
```

1. Comments are skipped. Example: `<!-- test -->`. Comment must end with `-->`. Nested comments are not possible.

> Note: constructions like `<!-->` and `<!--->` are not valid comments in HTML but they will be skipped by other rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: constructions like `<!-->` and `<!--->` are not valid comments in HTML but they are skipped by other rules.
```

> 2. CDATA is pasted verbatim. Note: CDATA is XML/XHTML specific. But we still process it for "best-effort" approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. CDATA is pasted verbatim. Note: CDATA is XML/XHTML specific. But it is processed for "best-effort" approach.
```

> 3. `script` and `style` elements are removed with all their content. Note: it's assumed that closing tag cannot appear inside content. For example, in JS string literal has to be escaped like `"<\/script>"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `script` and `style` elements are removed with all their content. Note: it is assumed that closing tag cannot appear inside content. For example, in JS string literal has to be escaped like `"<\/script>"`.
```

> Note: comments and CDATA is possible inside `script` or `style` - then closing tags are not searched inside CDATA. Example: `<script><![CDATA[</script>]]></script>` But they are still searched inside comments. Sometimes it becomes complicated: `<script>var x = "<!--"; </script> var y = "-->"; alert(x + y);</script>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: comments and CDATA are possible inside `script` or `style` - then closing tags are not searched inside CDATA. Example: `<script><![CDATA[</script>]]></script>` But they are still searched inside comments. Sometimes it becomes complicated: `<script>var x = "<!--"; </script> var y = "-->"; alert(x + y);</script>`
```

Note: `script` and `style` can be the names of XML namespaces - then they are not treated like usual `script` or `style` elements. Example: `<script:a>Hello</script:a>`.
Note: whitespaces are possible after closing tag name: `</script >` but not before: `< / script>`.
4. Other tags or tag-like elements are skipped without inner content. Example: `<a>.</a>`

> Note: it's expected that this HTML is illegal: `<a test=">"></a>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: it is expected that this HTML is illegal: `<a test=">"></a>`
```

> Note: it will also skip something like tags: `<>`, `<!>`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: it also skips something like tags: `<>`, `<!>`, etc.
```

> Note: tag without end will be skipped to the end of input: `<hello   `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: tag without end is skipped to the end of input: `<hello   `
```

5. HTML and XML entities are not decoded. They must be processed by separate function.
6. Whitespaces in the text are collapsed or inserted by specific rules.
    - Whitespaces at the beginning and at the end are removed.
    - Consecutive whitespaces are collapsed.
    - But if the text is separated by other elements and there is no whitespace, it is inserted.

>     - It may be unnatural examples: `Hello<b>world</b>`, `Hello<!-- -->world` - in HTML there will be no whitespace, but the function will insert it. But also consider: `Hello<p>world</p>`, `Hello<br>world`. This behavior is reasonable for data analysis, e.g. to convert HTML to a bag of words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - It may cause unnatural examples: `Hello<b>world</b>`, `Hello<!-- -->world` - in HTML there will be no whitespace, but the function will insert it. But also consider: `Hello<p>world</p>`, `Hello<br>world`. This behavior is reasonable for data analysis, e.g. to convert HTML to a bag of words.
```

> 7. Also note that correct handling of whitespaces would require support of `<pre></pre>` and CSS display and white-space properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Also note that correct handling of whitespaces requires the support of `<pre></pre>` and CSS display and whitespace properties.
```

**Syntax**

``` sql
extractTextFromHTML(x)
```

**Arguments**

-   `x` — input text. [String](../../sql-reference/data-types/string.md). 

**Returned value**

-   Extracted text.

Type: [String](../../sql-reference/data-types/string.md).

**Example**

The first example contains several tags and a comment and also shows whitespace processing.
The second example shows `CDATA` and `script` tag processing.

> In the third example a text is extracted from the full HTML response received by the [url](../../sql-reference/table-functions/url.md) function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the third example text is extracted from the full HTML response received by the [url](../../sql-reference/table-functions/url.md) function.
```
